We have over 600 muscles in our body.
They make up between 1/3 and 1/2 of our body weight.
And whether or not body building is your hobby,
muscles need your constant attention
because the way you treat them on a daily basis
determines whether they will wither or grow.
As you expose your muscles to stress,
they experience microscopic damage,
which, in this context, is a good thing.
In response, the injured cells release
inflammatory molecules called cytokines that
activate the immune system to repair the injury.
This is when the muscle-building magic happens.
The greater the damage to the muscle tissue,
the more your body will need to repair itself.
The resulting cycle of damage and repair
is what eventually makes muscles
bigger and stronger as they adapt to
progressively greater demands.
Since our bodies have already
adapted to most everyday activities,
those generally don't produce enough stress
to stimulate new muscle growth.
So, to build new muscle,
a process called hypertrophy,
our cells need to be exposed
to higher workloads than they are used to.
In fact, if you don't continuously expose
your muscles to some resistance, they will shrink,
a process known as muscular atrophy.
However, muscles rely on more
than just activity to grow.
Without proper nutrition, hormones, and rest,
your body would never be able to
repair damaged muscle fibers.
Protein in our diet preserves muscle mass
by providing the building blocks for
new tissue in the form of amino acids.
Adequate protein intake,
along with naturally occurring hormones,
like insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
and testosterone,
help shift the body into a state
where tissue is repaired and grown.
This vital repair process
mainly occurs when we're resting,
especially at night while sleeping.
Gender and age is also a major influence,
which is why young men with more testosterone
have a leg up in the muscle building game.
Genetic factors also play a role
in one's ability to grow muscle.
Some people have more robust
immune reactions to muscle damage,
and are better able to repair and
replace damaged muscle fibers,
increasing their muscle-building potential.
The body responds to the demands you place on it.
If you tear your muscles up,
eat right, rest and repeat,
you'll create the conditions to make
your muscles as big and strong as possible.